RESULTS

Richness and light had a weak interactive effect on the forecast error of taxa abundances (richness × light: p‐value = 0.0363; Figure 1a, Table 1, forecast method: Simplex EDM). The statistical support for this effect was somewhat limited (Figure 1a: overlapping confidence intervals), potentially due to high amounts of variance in the data. However, the interactive effect was consistent among forecast method, detrending approach, and scale of forecast error calculation (see below). The interaction of the two treatments resulted from opposite effects of species richness in constant versus declining light: forecast error tended to increase with species richness in constant light but tended to decrease with richness in declining light (Figure 1a). Specifically, when median richness increased by one species, forecast error increased by 5.6% (95% CI: −0.8%–12.1%) in constant light and decreased by 4.6% (95% CI: −11.0%–1.0%) in declining light relative to the baseline forecast error of 1 (i.e., the expected forecast error when the average value of a time series is used as the prediction). Note that the 95% confidence intervals of the estimates include zero despite the interaction term p‐value < 0.05. A discrepancy such as this can occur when the statistical evidence of an effect is not very strong (e.g., p‐value = 0.0363) and when different methods are used to calculate p‐values and confidence intervals. Specifically, approximate p‐values were calculated with Wald tests, whereas confidence intervals were calculated with profile likelihoods due to the greater precision of this approach.

Separate analyses at constant and declining light conditions also indicated opposite richness effects on taxa abundance forecasts in the two light conditions, as the slopes of the two relationships had opposite signs and neither of their 95% confidence intervals overlapped with zero (Table S7). Furthermore, we investigated the effect of the light decline on the forecast error of taxa abundances at the low and high end of the diversity gradient. The light decline reduced forecast error at high species richness but had no effect at low species richness (tested with a post hoc analysis; Table S9).

Forecastability of aggregate ecosystem properties was largely unaffected by the experimental treatments. Light and richness had no effect on the forecast error of total community biomass (Table 1, Figure 1b) except when biomass was forecasted with RNN (Table S10, Figure S19). In this case, treatments had similar effects as on the forecast error of taxa abundances. The forecast error of oxygen was unaffected by light and richness (Table S11, Figure S20). For most forecasting methods, forecast error of aggregate properties (community biomass, oxygen) did not differ from average forecast error of species abundances (Tables S12–S14).
